Add Workload Aware Scheduling v1.37 blog post placeholder (#56215)
kubernetes/website: content/en/blog/_posts/2026/kubernetes-v1-37-advancing-workload-aware-scheduling.md

  [`CompositePodGroup`](/docs/reference/command-line-tools-reference/feature-gates/#CompositePodGroup)
  feature gate on both the `kube-apiserver` and `kube-scheduler`, and ensure the `scheduling.k8s.io/v1alpha3` API group is enabled.
* **Workload API integration with the Job controller:** Enable the
  [`WorkloadWithJob`](/docs/reference/command-line-tools-reference/feature-gates/#WorkloadWithJob)
  feature gate on the `kube-apiserver` and `kube-controller-manager`.

**Controller Integration APIs:**

The new `workloadbuilder` library is available to developers building both out-of-tree and in-tree controllers who want to integrate with WAS. It does not require a feature gate. You can explore the library and find usage examples directly in the [`kubernetes/component-helpers`](https://github.com/kubernetes/component-helpers/tree/master/scheduling/schedulingv1/workloadbuilder) repository.

We encourage you to try out workload-aware scheduling in your test clusters
and share your experiences to help shape the future of Kubernetes scheduling.
You can send your feedback by:

* Reaching out via [Slack (#workload-aware-scheduling)](https://kubernetes.slack.com/archives/C0AHLJ0EAEL).

> * Joining the [SIG Scheduling](https://www.kubernetes.dev/community/community-groups/sigs/scheduling/#meetings) meetings.

Reviewer: Worth mentioning the new WG WAS slack and meetings

Author: Good point, done.

To support this, the Workload API is extended with the `spec.compositePodGroupTemplates` field. Each CompositePodGroupTemplate defines a template for a parent CompositePodGroup and directly nests the templates (`podGroupTemplates` and/or `compositePodGroupTemplates`) from which its child groups derive.

Below is a sample Workload object that defines a two-level template hierarchy:

```yaml
apiVersion: scheduling.k8s.io/v1beta1
kind: Workload
metadata:
  name: example-workload
spec:
  compositePodGroupTemplates:
    - name: workload-root
      schedulingPolicy:
        gang:
          minGroupCount: 2
      podGroupTemplates:
        - name: workers
          schedulingPolicy:
            gang:
              minCount: 4
        - name: driver
          schedulingPolicy:
            gang:
              minCount: 1
```

After creating `example-workload`, a controller can stamp out the corresponding runtime group objects from these templates:

1. A root CompositePodGroup that references the `workload-root` template in `example-workload` and carries its group-level scheduling policy (gang scheduling with `minGroupCount: 2`):

> 

Reviewer 2: Something missing here after `:`

Author: Good catch, thanks! It looks like I accidentally removed that in https://github.com/kubernetes/website/pull/56215/changes/26df24a5d6592b4a40fd9ff8d2cd78a7eea3ae71. Restored.

**Beta features:**

* **Workload API, gang scheduling, and preemption:** The
  [`GenericWorkload`](/docs/reference/command-line-tools-reference/feature-gates/#GenericWorkload)
  feature gate (which now integrates gang scheduling and workload-aware preemption) is Beta and disabled by default on the `kube-apiserver`, `kube-controller-manager` and `kube-scheduler`.
  Ensure your manifests are updated to use the `scheduling.k8s.io/v1beta1`
  {{< glossary_tooltip text="API group" term_id="api-group" >}}.
* **DRA ResourceClaim support for workloads:** Enable the
  [`DRAWorkloadResourceClaims`](/docs/reference/command-line-tools-reference/feature-gates/#DRAWorkloadResourceClaims)
  feature gate on the `kube-apiserver`, `kube-controller-manager`, `kube-scheduler` and `kubelet`.

**Alpha features:**

* **Topology-aware scheduling:** Enable the
  [`TopologyAwareWorkloadScheduling`](/docs/reference/command-line-tools-reference/feature-gates/#TopologyAwareWorkloadScheduling)
  feature gate on the `kube-apiserver` and `kube-scheduler`.

* **CompositePodGroup API:** Enable the

>   [`CompositePodGroup`](/docs/reference/command-line-tools-reference/feature-gates/#CompositePodGroup)

Reviewer 2: Please note that enabling `CompositePodGroup` on kube-controller-manager also requires `TopologyAwareScheduling=true`. This is not obvious IIUC.

Author: Good point, added a note about this.

>   feature gate on the `kube-apiserver`, `kube-controller-manager` and `kube-scheduler`, and ensure the `scheduling.k8s.io/v1alpha3` API group is enabled.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  feature gate on the `kube-apiserver`, `kube-controller-manager` and `kube-scheduler`, and ensure the `scheduling.k8s.io/v1alpha3` API version is enabled.
```
`scheduling.k8s.io/v1alpha3` is a API version. (Probably not needed.)

for Workload-aware preemption was merged into the `GenericWorkload` feature gate,
becoming a core part of the gang scheduling effort.

While the core concepts of workload-aware preemption stay the same, there are some
differences between the v1.36 and v1.37 releases:

### Performance and optimality

To check whether a preemptor can fit in the cluster thanks to preemption, the scheduler
simulates the removal of all potential victims and re-runs the scheduling algorithm. After
that it tries to reprieve as many victims as possible. In the v1.36 release, the scheduling
algorithm was run for each victim reprieval, verifying whether with the victim reprieved, the algorithm
can still find a valid placement for the preemptor. In v1.37, the scheduling algorithm is run only once
and the preemptor Pods are assumed based on its output. Later, the reprieval checks
whether a victim can still run in its place with the preemptor assumed.

### PodGroup as a victim

One of the limitations of v1.36 was the fact that the default preemption for single Pods
was not aware of PodGroups and was not respecting their `disruptionMode` fields, allowing

> for disruption of single Pods even when the PodGroup had `disruptionMode: PodGroup` set.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
was not aware of PodGroups and was not respecting their `disruptionMode` fields, allowing
for disruption of single Pods even when the PodGroup had `disruptionMode: {all: {}}` set.
```

Kubernetes v1.37 removes this limitation; the default preemption now respects the PodGroup
`disruptionMode` field.

### Rename of the disruptionMode fields

During the promotion of the API to Beta, the `disruptionMode` field was changed to decouple
its naming from the PodGroup object, allowing consistent naming across PodGroups and CompositePodGroups.

> The modes changed as follows: `PodGroup` became `All`, and `Pod` became `Single`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The modes changed as follows: `PodGroup` became `all`, and `Pod` became `single`.
```

feature gate is enabled, a PodGroup also has a `preemptionPolicy` field. It serves as an authoritative field for whether
a PodGroup can perform preemption.

## CompositePodGroup API

In Kubernetes v1.36, workload-aware scheduling established a clean separation between static workload templates (Workload) and runtime group state (PodGroup), but the supported scheduling policies were limited to a single, flat group. The CompositePodGroup API, introduced in Kubernetes v1.37, extends this model to support hierarchical scheduling requirements.

This API allows its consumers to express multi-level scheduling requirements by organizing a workload in a tree-shaped hierarchy consisting of CompositePodGroup and PodGroup objects. Each CompositePodGroup carries policies and constraints that apply to other groups (CompositePodGroups and/or PodGroups), similar to how PodGroups govern scheduling behavior for a flat group of Pods. The scheduler treats such a hierarchy as a single scheduling unit and aims to satisfy the requirements specified by every group within that hierarchy.

### Defining a workload hierarchy

> To express multi-level scheduling requirements, you define a hierarchy of templates in a Workload object based on which controllers create corresponding CompositePodGroup and PodGroup objects.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To express multi-level scheduling requirements, you define a hierarchy of templates in a Workload object. Controllers then create the corresponding CompositePodGroup and PodGroup objects from that hierarchy.
```

```yaml
apiVersion: scheduling.k8s.io/v1alpha3
kind: CompositePodGroup
metadata:
  name: example-root-group
spec:
  workloadRef:
    workloadName: example-workload
    templateName: workload-root
  schedulingPolicy:
    gang:
      minGroupCount: 2
```

2. Two child PodGroup objects (`example-workload-workers` and `example-workload-driver`) that reference their respective leaf templates in `example-workload` and link to the root group via `parentCompositePodGroupName`:

```yaml
apiVersion: scheduling.k8s.io/v1beta1
kind: PodGroup
metadata:
  name: example-workload-workers
spec:
  parentCompositePodGroupName: example-root-group
  workloadRef:
    workloadName: example-workload
    templateName: workers
  schedulingPolicy:
    gang:
      minCount: 4
---
apiVersion: scheduling.k8s.io/v1beta1
kind: PodGroup
metadata:
  name: example-workload-driver
spec:
  parentCompositePodGroupName: example-root-group
  workloadRef:
    workloadName: example-workload
    templateName: driver
  schedulingPolicy:
    gang:
      minCount: 1

> ```

Reviewer 3: ````suggestion
1. A root CompositePodGroup that references the `workload-root` template in `example-workload` and carries its group-level scheduling policy (gang scheduling with `minGroupCount: 2`):

    ```yaml
    apiVersion: scheduling.k8s.io/v1alpha3
    kind: CompositePodGroup
    metadata:
      name: example-root-group
    spec:
      workloadRef:
        workloadName: example-workload
        templateName: workload-root
      schedulingPolicy:
        gang:
          minGroupCount: 2
    ```

2. Two child PodGroup objects (`example-workload-workers` and `example-workload-driver`) that reference their respective leaf templates in `example-workload` and link to the root group via `parentCompositePodGroupName`:

    ```yaml
    apiVersion: scheduling.k8s.io/v1beta1
    kind: PodGroup
    metadata:
      name: example-workload-workers
    spec:
      parentCompositePodGroupName: example-root-group
      workloadRef:
        workloadName: example-workload
        templateName: workers
      schedulingPolicy:
        gang:
          minCount: 4
    ---
    apiVersion: scheduling.k8s.io/v1beta1
    kind: PodGroup
    metadata:
      name: example-workload-driver
    spec:
      parentCompositePodGroupName: example-root-group
      workloadRef:
        workloadName: example-workload
        templateName: driver
      schedulingPolicy:
        gang:
          minCount: 1
    ```
````

* **All-or-nothing scheduling**: Once a valid combination of child groups is found that satisfies the requirements of the root CompositePodGroup, the Pods across the entire hierarchy are scheduled and bound atomically. If the root group cannot satisfy its policy constraints, the entire hierarchy remains unschedulable and no Pods are bound, preventing partial deployments and deadlocks.

### Workload-aware preemption for the CompositePodGroup API

Kubernetes v1.37 extends workload-aware preemption to support CompositePodGroup hierarchies as well. Specifically, if a CompositePodGroup cannot be scheduled due to insufficient capacity in the cluster, the scheduler can invoke preemption to evict lower-priority workloads in order to fit the Pods belonging to that CompositePodGroup.

A CompositePodGroup can be selected for preemption as well. To specify the desired behavior during preemption, workload owners can specify an appropriate `disruptionMode` in the CompositePodGroup spec:

* **`Single` (default)**: Allows individual child groups within the CompositePodGroup to be preempted and disrupted independently.

> * **`All`**: Enforces "all-or-nothing" disruption semantics across the entire CompositePodGroup hierarchy. If any Pod within the descendant subtree must be preempted, the scheduler evicts all Pods across the entire hierarchy together.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* **`single`**: Allows individual child groups within the CompositePodGroup to be preempted and disrupted independently. This is the behavior when `disruptionMode` is not set.
* **`all`**: Enforces "all-or-nothing" disruption semantics across the entire CompositePodGroup hierarchy. If any Pod within the descendant subtree must be preempted, the scheduler evicts all Pods across the entire hierarchy together.
```

### Configuration and runtime execution

Using the updated Workload API (`scheduling.k8s.io/v1beta1`), you can configure multi-level topology constraints directly within `compositePodGroupTemplates`. In the example below, the parent template constrains the overall workload to a single availability zone (`topology.kubernetes.io/zone`), while child templates for `workers` and `driver` constrain their respective Pods to server racks (`topology.example.com/rack`) within that selected zone:

```yaml
apiVersion: scheduling.k8s.io/v1beta1
kind: Workload
metadata:
  name: multi-level-tas-workload
  namespace: job-ns
spec:
  compositePodGroupTemplates:
  - name: root
    schedulingPolicy:
      gang:
        minGroupCount: 2
    schedulingConstraints:
      topology:
      - key: topology.kubernetes.io/zone
    podGroupTemplates:
    - name: workers
      schedulingPolicy:
        gang:
          minCount: 8
      schedulingConstraints:
        topology:
        - key: topology.example.com/rack
    - name: driver
      schedulingPolicy:
        gang:
          minCount: 1
      schedulingConstraints:

>         topology:
>         - key: topology.example.com/rack
> ```
> 
> When a controller creates an instance of this workload at runtime, it spawns the corresponding runtime objects from these templates:
> 
> 1. The root CompositePodGroup referencing the `root` template, carrying the availability zone topology constraint and the hierarchical gang scheduling policy.
> 2. The two child PodGroup objects (`tas-workload-workers` and `tas-workload-driver`), each referencing the root CompositePodGroup as their parent group via the `parentCompositePodGroupName` spec field:
> 
> ```yaml
> apiVersion: scheduling.k8s.io/v1alpha3
> kind: CompositePodGroup
> metadata:
>   name: tas-workload-root
>   namespace: job-ns
> spec:
>   workloadRef:
>     workloadName: multi-level-tas-workload
>     templateName: root
>   schedulingPolicy:
>     gang:
>       minGroupCount: 2
>   schedulingConstraints:
>     topology:
>     - key: topology.kubernetes.io/zone
> ---
> apiVersion: scheduling.k8s.io/v1beta1
> kind: PodGroup
> metadata:
>   name: tas-workload-workers
>   namespace: job-ns
> spec:
>   parentCompositePodGroupName: tas-workload-root
>   workloadRef:
>     workloadName: multi-level-tas-workload
>     templateName: workers
>   schedulingPolicy:
>     gang:
>       minCount: 8
>   schedulingConstraints:
>     topology:
>     - key: topology.example.com/rack
> ---
> apiVersion: scheduling.k8s.io/v1beta1
> kind: PodGroup
> metadata:
>   name: tas-workload-driver
>   namespace: job-ns
> spec:
>   parentCompositePodGroupName: tas-workload-root
>   workloadRef:
>     workloadName: multi-level-tas-workload
>     templateName: driver
>   schedulingPolicy:
>     gang:
>       minCount: 1
>   schedulingConstraints:
>     topology:
>     - key: topology.example.com/rack
> ```

Reviewer 3: ````suggestion
1. The root CompositePodGroup referencing the `root` template, carrying the availability zone topology constraint and the hierarchical gang scheduling policy.
2. The two child PodGroup objects (`tas-workload-workers` and `tas-workload-driver`), each referencing the root CompositePodGroup as their parent group via the `parentCompositePodGroupName` spec field:

    ```yaml
    apiVersion: scheduling.k8s.io/v1alpha3
    kind: CompositePodGroup
    metadata:
      name: tas-workload-root
      namespace: job-ns
    spec:
      workloadRef:
        workloadName: multi-level-tas-workload
        templateName: root
      schedulingPolicy:
        gang:
          minGroupCount: 2
      schedulingConstraints:
        topology:
        - key: topology.kubernetes.io/zone
    ---
    apiVersion: scheduling.k8s.io/v1beta1
    kind: PodGroup
    metadata:
      name: tas-workload-workers
      namespace: job-ns
    spec:
      parentCompositePodGroupName: tas-workload-root
      workloadRef:
        workloadName: multi-level-tas-workload
        templateName: workers
      schedulingPolicy:
        gang:
          minCount: 8
      schedulingConstraints:
        topology:
        - key: topology.example.com/rack
    ---
    apiVersion: scheduling.k8s.io/v1beta1
    kind: PodGroup
    metadata:
      name: tas-workload-driver
      namespace: job-ns
    spec:
      parentCompositePodGroupName: tas-workload-root
      workloadRef:
        workloadName: multi-level-tas-workload
        templateName: driver
      schedulingPolicy:
        gang:
          minCount: 1
      schedulingConstraints:
        topology:
        - key: topology.example.com/rack
    ```
````

During scheduling, the scheduler evaluates multiple candidate availability zones across the cluster for `tas-workload-root`. For each candidate zone, it subdivides the nodes by rack topology to explore feasible rack placements for `tas-workload-workers` and `tas-workload-driver` strictly within that zone, systematically evaluating multiple combinations across available zones and racks before making a scheduling decision.

By allowing topology constraints to be modeled hierarchically, Kubernetes v1.37 provides a structured way to express multi-level co-location requirements across complex cluster infrastructures.

### Performance improvements for single-level TAS

> Alongside the Alpha introduction of multi-level hierarchies, Kubernetes v1.37 brings noticeable performance improvements to existing single-level topology-aware scheduling. We are continuously working to optimize the efficiency of placement evaluation algorithms in `kube-scheduler` and plan to deliver further performance improvements in future releases.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Alongside the Alpha introduction of multi-level hierarchies, Kubernetes v1.37 reduces the cost of placement evaluation for existing single-level topology-aware scheduling. We are continuously working to optimize the efficiency of placement evaluation algorithms in `kube-scheduler` and plan to deliver further performance improvements in future releases.
```

## Integration with the Job Controller

Building upon the new Controller Integration APIs, the Job API now features an explicit `.spec.scheduling` field, so you declare how a Job should be scheduled instead of relying on the Job controller to infer it from the Job's shape. This expands support well beyond static, indexed, and fully-parallel Jobs.

`.spec.scheduling` is composed of the building blocks described above:

* `schedulingPolicy` — `basic` for standard Pod-by-Pod scheduling, or `gang` for all-or-nothing scheduling.
* `schedulingConstraints` — the topology domain the Job's Pods must be co-located within.
* `disruptionMode` — whether the Job's Pods can be preempted individually (`single`) or only as a whole (`all`).
* `resourceClaims` — the ResourceClaims shared by all of the Job's Pods.

For example:

```yaml
apiVersion: batch/v1
kind: Job
metadata:
  name: distributed-training-job
spec:
  parallelism: 8
  completions: 8
  scheduling:
    schedulingPolicy:
      gang: {}                # minCount omitted -> defaults to parallelism (8)
    schedulingConstraints:
      key:

>       - level: topology.kubernetes.io/zone

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    schedulingConstraints:
      topology:
      - key: topology.kubernetes.io/zone
```

Reviewer: Done

* **Graduation of Controller Integration Building Blocks to Beta:** Further refining the integration APIs to ensure a robust developer experience.
* **Increased adoption and integration:** Expanding the ecosystem by integrating workload-aware scheduling with other controllers, with a particular focus on hierarchical orchestrators such as [JobSet](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/jobset).
* **Kueue Integration:** Fostering closer alignment between WAS and [Kueue](https://kueue.sigs.k8s.io/). In the near term, we aim to ensure Kueue is fully aware of WAS features for seamless interoperability. In the long term, we envision Kueue leveraging WAS as its underlying engine for capabilities like gang-scheduling and topology-aware placement.

## Getting started

Many of the workload-aware scheduling improvements are now available as Beta features in v1.37, while new advanced capabilities are introduced in Alpha. Note that both Beta and Alpha features are disabled by default and require manual enablement.

* **Workload API, Gang Scheduling, and Preemption:** The
  [`GenericWorkload`](/docs/reference/command-line-tools-reference/feature-gates/#GenericWorkload)

>   feature gate (which now integrates Gang scheduling and Workload-aware preemption) is Beta and disabled by default on the `kube-apiserver` and `kube-scheduler`. Ensure your manifests are updated to use the `scheduling.k8s.io/v1beta1`

Reviewer 2: https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/blob/b175ab3f86ee0cb30f7557df699f52f8eee8ef67/keps/sig-scheduling/4671-gang-scheduling/kep.yaml#L50-L54, also KCM?

Reviewer: Right, added the KCM here and for CPG gate

  feature gate (which now integrates gang scheduling and workload-aware preemption) is Beta and disabled by default on the `kube-apiserver`, `kube-controller-manager` and `kube-scheduler`.
  Ensure your manifests are updated to use the `scheduling.k8s.io/v1beta1`
  {{< glossary_tooltip text="API group" term_id="api-group" >}}.
* **DRA ResourceClaim support for workloads:** Enable the
  [`DRAWorkloadResourceClaims`](/docs/reference/command-line-tools-reference/feature-gates/#DRAWorkloadResourceClaims)
  feature gate on the `kube-apiserver`, `kube-controller-manager`, `kube-scheduler` and `kubelet`.

**Alpha features:**

* **Topology-aware scheduling:** Enable the
  [`TopologyAwareWorkloadScheduling`](/docs/reference/command-line-tools-reference/feature-gates/#TopologyAwareWorkloadScheduling)
  feature gate on the `kube-apiserver` and `kube-scheduler`.

* **CompositePodGroup API:** Enable the
  [`CompositePodGroup`](/docs/reference/command-line-tools-reference/feature-gates/#CompositePodGroup)
  feature gate on the `kube-apiserver`, `kube-controller-manager` and `kube-scheduler`, and ensure the `scheduling.k8s.io/v1alpha3` API group is enabled.

> * **Workload API integration with the Job controller:** Enable the
>   [`WorkloadWithJob`](/docs/reference/command-line-tools-reference/feature-gates/#WorkloadWithJob)
>   feature gate on the `kube-apiserver` and `kube-controller-manager`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* **Workload API integration with the Job controller:** Enable the
  [`WorkloadWithJob`](/docs/reference/command-line-tools-reference/feature-gates/#WorkloadWithJob)
  feature gate on the `kube-apiserver` and `kube-controller-manager`.
* **PodGroup `preemptionPolicy`:** Enable the
  [`PodGroupPreemptionPolicy`](/docs/reference/command-line-tools-reference/feature-gates/#PodGroupPreemptionPolicy)
  feature gate on the `kube-apiserver` and `kube-scheduler`.
```

Alongside these API additions, v1.37 focuses on streamlining adoption by introducing a new set of Controller Integration APIs and the `workloadbuilder` library. These provide standardized building blocks that significantly simplify how out-of-tree controllers can integrate with WAS capabilities. Utilizing these new tools, the native Job controller integration has been upgraded to fully consume the expanded WAS APIs—enabling advanced scheduling policies, flexible disruption modes, and topology-aware scheduling for standard batch workloads.

## Gang Scheduling and Workload/PodGroup APIs

Kubernetes v1.37 delivers a major milestone: Workload/PodGroup APIs and Gang Scheduling
are officially graduating to Beta. This graduation signals that native, "all-or-nothing"
scheduling for workloads is solidifying for wider adoption.

Key updates to the API and gang scheduling algorithm in this release include:

> 1. Beta graduation and API versioning changes

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Beta graduation and API versioning changes
```

The core Workload and PodGroup APIs have been promoted to v1beta1, meaning they are now one step away from
General Availability (GA). For early adopters who have been testing these features,
take note of the alpha versioning transition: v1alpha2 has been entirely replaced by v1alpha3.
This transition introduces breaking changes designed to clean up the API structure around `disruptionMode`.

> 2. Native PodGroup queueing

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Native PodGroup queueing
```

A significant under-the-hood improvement in v1.37 makes the PodGroup a first-class citizen in the scheduling queue.
Previously, even if belonging to a PodGroup, all member Pods were queued individually. Now, only the top-level PodGroup
object is queued. This ensures all Pods share the same queueing behavior and lays the groundwork
for more advanced PodGroup queueing strategies in the future.

> 3. Dynamic elasticity with minCount mutability

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Dynamic elasticity with minCount mutability
```

In earlier iterations, the `minCount` field, which dictates the minimum number of Pods required

> to successfully schedule a PodGroup, was strictly immutable. In v1.37, minCount is now mutable.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
to successfully schedule a PodGroup, was strictly immutable. In v1.37, `minCount` is now mutable.
```

This API change unlocks flexibility for elastic workloads. Controllers can now dynamically
adjust the minimum required size of a gang on the fly, allowing workloads to gracefully degrade
or expand without interrupting already-scheduled Pods.

## Workload-Aware Preemption

In Kubernetes v1.37 the separate
`WorkloadAwarePreemption` [feature gate](/docs/reference/command-line-tools-reference/feature-gates/)
for Workload-aware preemption was merged into the `GenericWorkload` feature gate,
becoming a core part of the gang scheduling effort.

> While the core concepts of workload-aware preemption stays the same, there are some

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
While the core concepts of workload-aware preemption stay the same, there are some
```

differences between the v1.36 and v1.37 releases:

> 1. Performance and optimality

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Performance and optimality
```

To check whether a preemptor can fit in the cluster thanks to preemption, the scheduler
simulates the removal of all potential victims and re-runs the scheduling algorithm. After
that it tries to reprieve as many victims as possible. In the v1.36 release, the scheduling
algorithm was run for each victim reprieval, verifying whether with the victim reprieved, the algorithm
can still find a valid placement for the preemptor. In v1.37, the scheduling algorithm is run only once

> and the preemptor pods are assumed based on its output. Later, the reprieval checks

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
and the preemptor Pods are assumed based on its output. Later, the reprieval checks
```

whether a victim can still run in its place with the preemptor assumed.

> 2. PodGroup as a victim

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### PodGroup as a victim
```

One of the limitations of v1.36 was the fact that the default preemption for single pods
was not aware of PodGroups and was not respecting their `disruptionMode` fields, allowing
for disruption of single pods even when the PodGroup had `disruptionMode: PodGroup` set.
Kubernetes v1.37 removes this limitation; the default preemption will now respect the PodGroup

> `disruptionMode` field.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
One of the limitations of v1.36 was the fact that the default preemption for single Pods
was not aware of PodGroups and was not respecting their `disruptionMode` fields, allowing
for disruption of single Pods even when the PodGroup had `disruptionMode: PodGroup` set.
Kubernetes v1.37 removes this limitation; the default preemption now respects the PodGroup
`disruptionMode` field.
```

> 3. Rename of the `disruptionMode` fields

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Rename of the disruptionMode fields
```

During the promotion of the API to beta, the `disruptionMode` field was changed to decouple 
its naming from the PodGroup object, allowing consistent naming across PodGroups and CompositePodGroups.

> The modes changed as follows: `PodGroup` -> `All`, `Pod` -> `Single`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
During the promotion of the API to Beta, the `disruptionMode` field was changed to decouple
its naming from the PodGroup object, allowing consistent naming across PodGroups and CompositePodGroups.
The modes changed as follows: `PodGroup` became `All`, and `Pod` became `Single`.
```

> 4. Support for preemptionPolicy

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Support for preemptionPolicy
```

In v1.36, the PodGroup does not have a `preemptionPolicy` field. The PodGroup can perform
preemption as long as none of the pods forming it has `preemptionPolicy: Never` set. In v1.37,

> when [PodGroupPreemptionPolicy](/docs/reference/command-line-tools-reference/feature-gates/podgroup-preemption-policy/)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In v1.36, the PodGroup does not have a `preemptionPolicy` field. The PodGroup can perform
preemption as long as none of the Pods forming it has `preemptionPolicy: Never` set. In v1.37,
when the [`PodGroupPreemptionPolicy`](/docs/reference/command-line-tools-reference/feature-gates/#PodGroupPreemptionPolicy)
```

feature gate is enabled, a PodGroup also has a `preemptionPolicy` field. It serves as an authoritative field for whether
a PodGroup can perform preemption.

## CompositePodGroup API

> In Kubernetes v1.36, workload-aware scheduling established a clean separation between static workload templates (`Workload`) and runtime group state (`PodGroup`), but the supported scheduling policies were limited to a single, flat group. The `CompositePodGroup` API, introduced in Kubernetes v1.37, extends this model to support hierarchical scheduling requirements.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In Kubernetes v1.36, workload-aware scheduling established a clean separation between static workload templates (Workload) and runtime group state (PodGroup), but the supported scheduling policies were limited to a single, flat group. The CompositePodGroup API, introduced in Kubernetes v1.37, extends this model to support hierarchical scheduling requirements.
```

> This API allows its consumers to express multi-level scheduling requirements by organizing a workload in a tree-shaped hierarchy consisting of `CompositePodGroup` and `PodGroup` objects. Each `CompositePodGroup` carries policies and constraints that apply to other groups (`CompositePodGroups` and/or `PodGroups`), similar to how `PodGroups` govern scheduling behavior for a flat group of Pods. The scheduler treats such a hierarchy as a single scheduling unit and aims to satisfy the requirements specified by every group within that hierarchy.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This API allows its consumers to express multi-level scheduling requirements by organizing a workload in a tree-shaped hierarchy consisting of CompositePodGroup and PodGroup objects. Each CompositePodGroup carries policies and constraints that apply to other groups (CompositePodGroups and/or PodGroups), similar to how PodGroups govern scheduling behavior for a flat group of Pods. The scheduler treats such a hierarchy as a single scheduling unit and aims to satisfy the requirements specified by every group within that hierarchy.
```

### Defining a workload hierarchy

> To express multi-level scheduling requirements, you define a hierarchy of templates in a `Workload` object based on which controllers create corresponding `CompositePodGroup` and `PodGroup` objects.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To express multi-level scheduling requirements, you define a hierarchy of templates in a Workload object based on which controllers create corresponding CompositePodGroup and PodGroup objects.
```

> To support this, the `Workload` API is extended with the `spec.compositePodGroupTemplates` field. Each `CompositePodGroupTemplate` defines a template for a parent `CompositePodGroup` and directly nests the templates (`podGroupTemplates` and/or `compositePodGroupTemplates`) from which its child groups derive.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To support this, the Workload API is extended with the `spec.compositePodGroupTemplates` field. Each CompositePodGroupTemplate defines a template for a parent CompositePodGroup and directly nests the templates (`podGroupTemplates` and/or `compositePodGroupTemplates`) from which its child groups derive.
```

> Below is a sample `Workload` object that defines a two-level template hierarchy:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Below is a sample Workload object that defines a two-level template hierarchy:
```

```yaml
apiVersion: scheduling.k8s.io/v1alpha3

> kind: Workload

Reviewer 2: Better use new v1beta1 for workload and podgroup?

Author: Good catch, done.

metadata:
  name: example-workload
spec:
  compositePodGroupTemplates:
    - name: workload-root
      schedulingPolicy:
        gang:
          minGroupCount: 2
      podGroupTemplates:
        - name: workers
          schedulingPolicy:
            gang:
              minCount: 4
        - name: driver
          schedulingPolicy:
            gang:
              minCount: 1
```

After creating `example-workload`, a controller can stamp out the corresponding runtime group objects from these templates:

> 1. A root `CompositePodGroup` that references the `workload-root` template in `example-workload` and carries its group-level scheduling policy (gang scheduling with `minGroupCount: 2`):

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
After creating `example-workload`, a controller can stamp out the corresponding runtime group objects from these templates:

1. A root CompositePodGroup that references the `workload-root` template in `example-workload` and carries its group-level scheduling policy (gang scheduling with `minGroupCount: 2`):
```

```yaml
apiVersion: scheduling.k8s.io/v1alpha3
kind: CompositePodGroup
metadata:
  name: example-root-group
spec:
  workloadRef:
    workloadName: example-workload
    templateName: workload-root
  schedulingPolicy:
    gang:
      minGroupCount: 2
```

> 2. Two child `PodGroup` objects (`example-workload-workers` and `example-workload-driver`) that reference their respective leaf templates in `example-workload` and link to the root group via `parentCompositePodGroupName`:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
2. Two child PodGroup objects (`example-workload-workers` and `example-workload-driver`) that reference their respective leaf templates in `example-workload` and link to the root group via `parentCompositePodGroupName`:
```

```yaml

> apiVersion: scheduling.k8s.io/v1alpha3

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
apiVersion: scheduling.k8s.io/v1beta1
```

kind: PodGroup
metadata:
  name: example-workload-workers
spec:
  parentCompositePodGroupName: example-root-group
  workloadRef:
    workloadName: example-workload
    templateName: workers
  schedulingPolicy:
    gang:
      minCount: 4
---

> apiVersion: scheduling.k8s.io/v1alpha3

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
apiVersion: scheduling.k8s.io/v1beta1
```

kind: PodGroup
metadata:
  name: example-workload-driver
spec:
  parentCompositePodGroupName: example-root-group
  workloadRef:
    workloadName: example-workload
    templateName: driver
  schedulingPolicy:
    gang:
      minCount: 1
```

### How multi-level gang scheduling works

To schedule a hierarchical workload, `kube-scheduler` evaluates the entire group tree as a unified scheduling unit:

* **Recursive evaluation**: The scheduler traverses the hierarchy from the root `CompositePodGroup` down to the leaf `PodGroup` objects. At each level, a parent `CompositePodGroup` is considered schedulable only when its child groups satisfy its scheduling policy (for example, placing at least `minGroupCount` of child groups when using the gang policy), while each leaf `PodGroup` must satisfy its own pod-level policy (for example, placing at least `minCount` of member Pods when using the gang policy).

> * **All-or-nothing scheduling**: Once a valid combination of child groups is found that satisfies the requirements of the root `CompositePodGroup`, the Pods across the entire hierarchy are scheduled and bound atomically. If the root group cannot satisfy its policy constraints, the entire hierarchy remains unschedulable and no Pods are bound, preventing partial deployments and deadlocks.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To schedule a hierarchical workload, `kube-scheduler` evaluates the entire group tree as a unified scheduling unit:

* **Recursive evaluation**: The scheduler traverses the hierarchy from the root CompositePodGroup down to the leaf PodGroup objects. At each level, a parent CompositePodGroup is considered schedulable only when its child groups satisfy its scheduling policy (for example, placing at least `minGroupCount` of child groups when using the gang policy), while each leaf PodGroup must satisfy its own Pod-level policy (for example, placing at least `minCount` of member Pods when using the gang policy).
* **All-or-nothing scheduling**: Once a valid combination of child groups is found that satisfies the requirements of the root CompositePodGroup, the Pods across the entire hierarchy are scheduled and bound atomically. If the root group cannot satisfy its policy constraints, the entire hierarchy remains unschedulable and no Pods are bound, preventing partial deployments and deadlocks.
```

> ### Workload-aware preemption for CompositePodGroup API

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Workload-aware preemption for the CompositePodGroup API
```

Kubernetes v1.37 extends workload-aware preemption to support `CompositePodGroup` hierarchies as well. Specifically, if a `CompositePodGroup` cannot be scheduled due to insufficient capacity in the cluster, the scheduler can invoke preemption to evict lower-priority workloads in order to fit the Pods belonging to that `CompositePodGroup`.

> `CompositePodGroup` can be selected for preemption as well. To specify the desired behavior during preemption, workload owners can specify an appropriate `disruptionMode` in the `CompositePodGroup` spec:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Kubernetes v1.37 extends workload-aware preemption to support CompositePodGroup hierarchies as well. Specifically, if a CompositePodGroup cannot be scheduled due to insufficient capacity in the cluster, the scheduler can invoke preemption to evict lower-priority workloads in order to fit the Pods belonging to that CompositePodGroup.

A CompositePodGroup can be selected for preemption as well. To specify the desired behavior during preemption, workload owners can specify an appropriate `disruptionMode` in the CompositePodGroup spec:
```

* **`Single` (Default)**: Allows individual child groups within the `CompositePodGroup` to be preempted and disrupted independently.

> * **`All`**: Enforces "all-or-nothing" disruption semantics across the entire `CompositePodGroup` hierarchy. If any Pod within the descendant subtree must be preempted, the scheduler evicts all Pods across the entire hierarchy together.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* **`Single` (default)**: Allows individual child groups within the CompositePodGroup to be preempted and disrupted independently.
* **`All`**: Enforces "all-or-nothing" disruption semantics across the entire CompositePodGroup hierarchy. If any Pod within the descendant subtree must be preempted, the scheduler evicts all Pods across the entire hierarchy together.
```

## Topology-aware scheduling

In Kubernetes v1.37, topology-aware scheduling expands to support complex, multi-level workload hierarchies and delivers performance improvements for existing single-level deployments.

### Multi-level topology-aware scheduling

In Kubernetes v1.36, we introduced foundational topology-aware scheduling, allowing you to define co-location constraints directly on a PodGroup. While effective for single-level groupings, complex distributed workloads—such as large-scale AI/ML training, JobSet deployments, or disaggregated inference via LeaderWorkerSet (LWS)—often require co-location across multiple levels of cluster infrastructure simultaneously.

For example, an entire workload may need to run within a single availability zone, while different parts of that workload (such as specific worker groups or driver processes) require strict co-location within specific server racks.

> In Kubernetes v1.37, alongside the new `CompositePodGroup` API (`scheduling.k8s.io/v1alpha3`), topology-aware scheduling expands to support **multi-level topology-aware scheduling**. You can now express complex co-location requirements by specifying topology constraints at different levels of a group hierarchy.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In Kubernetes v1.37, alongside the new CompositePodGroup API (`scheduling.k8s.io/v1alpha3`), topology-aware scheduling expands to support **multi-level topology-aware scheduling**. You can now express complex co-location requirements by specifying topology constraints at different levels of a group hierarchy.
```

### Top-down topology constraint resolution

During hierarchical scheduling, the `kube-scheduler` resolves multi-level topology constraints in a **top-down** manner. Specifically, topology domains that are considered during the scheduling of a child group are confined within a topology domain that corresponds to the placement assumed by the parent group.

### Configuration and runtime execution

> Using the updated Workload API (`scheduling.k8s.io/v1alpha3`), you can configure multi-level topology constraints directly within `CompositePodGroupTemplates`. In the example below, the parent template constrains the overall workload to a single availability zone (`topology.kubernetes.io/zone`), while child templates for `workers` and `driver` constrain their respective Pods to server racks (`topology.example.com/rack`) within that selected zone:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Using the updated Workload API (`scheduling.k8s.io/v1alpha3`), you can configure multi-level topology constraints directly within `compositePodGroupTemplates`. In the example below, the parent template constrains the overall workload to a single availability zone (`topology.kubernetes.io/zone`), while child templates for `workers` and `driver` constrain their respective Pods to server racks (`topology.example.com/rack`) within that selected zone:
```

```yaml
apiVersion: scheduling.k8s.io/v1alpha3
kind: Workload
metadata:
  name: multi-level-tas-workload
  namespace: job-ns
spec:
  compositePodGroupTemplates:
  - name: root
    schedulingPolicy:
      gang:
        minGroupCount: 2
    schedulingConstraints:
      topology:
      - key: topology.kubernetes.io/zone
    podGroupTemplates:
    - name: workers
      schedulingPolicy:
        gang:
          minCount: 8
      schedulingConstraints:
        topology:
        - key: topology.example.com/rack
    - name: driver
      schedulingPolicy:
        gang:
          minCount: 1
      schedulingConstraints:
        topology:
        - key: topology.example.com/rack
```

When a controller creates an instance of this workload at runtime, it spawns the corresponding runtime objects from these templates:

1. The root `CompositePodGroup` referencing the `root` template, carrying the availability zone topology constraint and the hierarchical gang scheduling policy.

> 2. The two child `PodGroup` objects (`tas-workload-workers` and `tas-workload-driver`), each referencing the root `CompositePodGroup` as their parent group via the `parentCompositePodGroupName` spec field:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When a controller creates an instance of this workload at runtime, it spawns the corresponding runtime objects from these templates:

1. The root CompositePodGroup referencing the `root` template, carrying the availability zone topology constraint and the hierarchical gang scheduling policy.
2. The two child PodGroup objects (`tas-workload-workers` and `tas-workload-driver`), each referencing the root CompositePodGroup as their parent group via the `parentCompositePodGroupName` spec field:
```

```yaml
apiVersion: scheduling.k8s.io/v1alpha3
kind: CompositePodGroup
metadata:
  name: tas-workload-root
  namespace: job-ns
spec:
  workloadRef:
    workloadName: multi-level-tas-workload
    templateName: root
  schedulingPolicy:
    gang:
      minGroupCount: 2
  schedulingConstraints:
    topology:
    - key: topology.kubernetes.io/zone
---
apiVersion: scheduling.k8s.io/v1beta1
kind: PodGroup
metadata:
  name: tas-workload-workers
  namespace: job-ns
spec:
  parentCompositePodGroupName: tas-workload-root
  workloadRef:
    workloadName: multi-level-tas-workload
    templateName: workers
  schedulingPolicy:
    gang:
      minCount: 8
  schedulingConstraints:
    topology:
    - key: topology.example.com/rack
---
apiVersion: scheduling.k8s.io/v1beta1
kind: PodGroup
metadata:
  name: tas-workload-driver
  namespace: job-ns
spec:
  parentCompositePodGroupName: tas-workload-root
  workloadRef:
    workloadName: multi-level-tas-workload
    templateName: driver
  schedulingPolicy:
    gang:
      minCount: 1
  schedulingConstraints:
    topology:
    - key: topology.example.com/rack
```

> During scheduling, the scheduler evaluates multiple candidate availability zones across the cluster for tas-workload-root. For each candidate zone, it subdivides the nodes by rack topology to explore feasible rack placements for tas-workload-workers and tas-workload-driver strictly within that zone, systematically evaluating multiple combinations across available zones and racks before making a scheduling decision.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
During scheduling, the scheduler evaluates multiple candidate availability zones across the cluster for `tas-workload-root`. For each candidate zone, it subdivides the nodes by rack topology to explore feasible rack placements for `tas-workload-workers` and `tas-workload-driver` strictly within that zone, systematically evaluating multiple combinations across available zones and racks before making a scheduling decision.
```

By allowing topology constraints to be modeled hierarchically, Kubernetes v1.37 provides a structured way to express multi-level co-location requirements across complex cluster infrastructures.

### Performance improvements for single-level TAS

> Alongside the alpha introduction of multi-level hierarchies, Kubernetes v1.37 brings noticeable performance improvements to existing single-level topology-aware scheduling. We are continuously working to optimize the efficiency of placement evaluation algorithms in kube-scheduler and plan to deliver further performance improvements in future releases.

Reviewer 2: Do we have some benchmark data for this or a dashboard link in https://perf-dash.k8s.io/ to show the improvement?

Author: @brejman - do we have any concrete data to share?

Reviewer 4: ~20% improvement in average throughput, but only in specific scenarios. Those scenarios are unfortunately not covered currently in scheduler_perf, so the data is from a local benchmark.

The scenario in question is: 16-node domains, 1 pod-per-node, 16 pods-per-group, checked in configurations:

| Workload | Before (pods/s) | After (pods/s) | Change | Change (%) |
|---|---|---|---|---|
| `2048Nodes_128Gangs_2048Pods` | 36.65 | **48.00** | +11.35 pods/s | **+30.97%** |
| `8196Nodes_512Gangs_8196Pods` | 9.21 | **11.63** | +2.42 pods/s | **+26.28%** |

The absolute values are still much lower than for pod-by-pod scheduling, so I'm considering if we should even mention this.

The improvement is caused by https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/b3bc2ac58fa173967f27ade80f28cc5015b8c1c3/pkg/scheduler/framework/plugins/gangscheduling/gangscheduling.go#L494-L497, which allows the scheduling cycle to abort early.

The existing scheduler_perf tests showed this improvement, but typically on higher percentiles for the throughput, as those tests have bigger domains and the new logic starts getting effective as the remaining space in domains gets smaller.

> 
> Alongside the alpha introduction of multi-level hierarchies, Kubernetes v1.37 brings noticeable performance improvements to existing single-level topology-aware scheduling. We are continuously working to optimize the efficiency of placement evaluation algorithms in kube-scheduler and plan to deliver further performance improvements in future releases.
> 
> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Performance improvements for single-level TAS

Alongside the Alpha introduction of multi-level hierarchies, Kubernetes v1.37 brings noticeable performance improvements to existing single-level topology-aware scheduling. We are continuously working to optimize the efficiency of placement evaluation algorithms in `kube-scheduler` and plan to deliver further performance improvements in future releases.

```

## Controller Integration APIs

Kubernetes v1.37 introduces new standard building blocks so that every controller can expose the same scheduling primitives in their own APIs, and share the same logic for translating them into scheduling objects. 
These primitives express specific scheduling behaviors — such as policies or disruption logic — while 
leaving the field naming flexible for each controller. A prime example of this is the native Job 

> controller, which we detail in the next section.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Kubernetes v1.37 introduces new standard building blocks so that every controller can expose the same scheduling primitives in their own APIs, and share the same logic for translating them into scheduling objects.
These primitives express specific scheduling behaviors — such as policies or disruption logic — while
leaving the field naming flexible for each controller. A prime example of this is the native Job
controller, which we detail in the next section.
```

Types prefixed with `WorkloadPodGroup` describe a leaf group of Pods; types prefixed with 
`WorkloadCompositePodGroup` describe a group of groups. A controller embeds them verbatim into 

> its own API, under whatever field name fits its domain:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Types prefixed with `WorkloadPodGroup` describe a leaf group of Pods; types prefixed with
`WorkloadCompositePodGroup` describe a group of groups. A controller embeds them verbatim into
its own API, under whatever field name fits its domain:
```

* `WorkloadPodGroupSchedulingPolicy` — either `basic`, meaning standard Pod-by-Pod scheduling, or `gang` with a `minCount`. The composite variant takes a `minGroupCount` instead.
* `WorkloadPodGroupSchedulingConstraints` — the topology constraints (`topology[].key`) the group's Pods must be co-located within.
* `WorkloadPodGroupDisruptionMode` — `single` or `all`, with the preemption semantics described earlier in this post.
* `WorkloadPodGroupResourceClaim` — the ResourceClaims shared across the group.

Only the shapes are shared, so controllers retain full autonomy over how they name and nest these fields in their own APIs.

> **The `workloadbuilder` library** turns that intent into the scheduling objects. A controller describes its workload as a tree of `WorkloadItem` nodes — a node with children compiles to a `CompositePodGroupTemplate`, a node without children to a `PodGroupTemplate` — and attaches its own defaults plus the user-supplied building blocks to each node. From there, `Validate()` reports problems back at the exact field path within the controller's own API, `BuildWorkload()` compiles the tree into a `Workload`, and `NewPodGroup()` and `NewCompositePodGroup()` stamp out the runtime group objects.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
**The `workloadbuilder` library** turns that intent into the scheduling objects. A controller describes its workload as a tree of `WorkloadItem` nodes — a node with children compiles to a `CompositePodGroupTemplate`, a node without children to a `PodGroupTemplate` — and attaches its own defaults plus the user-supplied building blocks to each node. From there, `Validate()` reports problems back at the exact field path within the controller's own API, `BuildWorkload()` compiles the tree into a Workload, and `NewPodGroup()` and `NewCompositePodGroup()` stamp out the runtime group objects.
```

Validation is deny-by-default: a controller declares the policies and disruption modes it actually supports through `AllowedPolicies` and `AllowedDisruptionModes`, and anything outside those lists is rejected. Building blocks added in future releases therefore stay unavailable until a controller explicitly opts into them.

For hierarchical workloads where a parent controller owns the `Workload` and delegates group creation to its children, `NewBuilderFromExistingWorkload` lets a child materialize only its own `PodGroup` from the parent's `Workload`.

> Neither the building blocks nor the library have a feature gate of their own; they become user-visible through whichever controller adopts them. The native Job controller is the first to do so, and we detail it in the next section.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For hierarchical workloads where a parent controller owns the Workload and delegates group creation to its children, `NewBuilderFromExistingWorkload` lets a child materialize only its own PodGroup from the parent's Workload.

Neither the building blocks nor the library have a feature gate of their own; they become user-visible through whichever controller adopts them. The native Job controller is the first to do so, and we detail it in the next section.
```

## Integration with the Job Controller

> Building upon the new Controller Integration APIs, the Job API now features an explicit `.spec.scheduling` field, so you declare how a Job should be scheduled instead of relying on the Job controller to infer it from the Job's shape. This expands support well beyond static, indexed, and fully-parallel Jobs.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Integration with the Job controller

Building upon the new Controller Integration APIs, the Job API now features an explicit `.spec.scheduling` field, so you declare how a Job should be scheduled instead of relying on the Job controller to infer it from the Job's shape. This expands support well beyond static, indexed, and fully-parallel Jobs.
```

* `schedulingConstraints` — the topology domain the Job's Pods must be co-located within.
* `disruptionMode` — whether the Job's Pods can be preempted individually (`single`) or only as a whole (`all`).
* `resourceClaims` — the ResourceClaims shared by all of the Job's Pods.

For example:

```yaml
apiVersion: batch/v1
kind: Job
metadata:
  name: distributed-training-job
spec:
  parallelism: 8
  completions: 8
  scheduling:
    schedulingPolicy:
      gang: {}                # minCount omitted -> defaults to parallelism (8)
    schedulingConstraints:
      topology:
      - key: topology.kubernetes.io/zone
    disruptionMode:
      all: {}
  template:
    spec:
      containers:
      ...
```

Omitting `.spec.scheduling`, or omitting `schedulingPolicy` within it, selects the `basic` policy, which behaves exactly like standard Job scheduling today.

For every Job it manages, the controller compiles this configuration into a `Workload` and a `PodGroup` 
owned by the Job, and sets `.spec.schedulingGroup.podGroupName` on each Pod it creates so the scheduler 
treats them as one group. Once created, `.spec.scheduling` is immutable, with one exception: 

> `schedulingPolicy.gang.minCount` can be updated, which lets you resize a running gang.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For every Job it manages, the controller compiles this configuration into a Workload and a PodGroup
owned by the Job, and sets `.spec.schedulingGroup.podGroupName` on each Pod it creates so the scheduler
treats them as one group. Once created, `.spec.scheduling` is immutable, with one exception:
`schedulingPolicy.gang.minCount` can be updated, which lets you resize a running gang.
```

## DRA ResourceClaim Support for Workloads

> As the core WAS APIs mature, so do their integrations with {{< glossary_tooltip text="Dynamic Resource Allocation" term_id="dra" >}}

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## DRA ResourceClaim support for workloads

As the core WAS APIs mature, so do their integrations with {{< glossary_tooltip text="Dynamic Resource Allocation" term_id="dra" >}}
```

## Getting started

Many of the workload-aware scheduling improvements are now available as Beta features in v1.37, while new advanced capabilities are introduced in Alpha. Note that both Beta and Alpha features are disabled by default and require manual enablement.

* **Workload API, Gang Scheduling, and Preemption:** The
  [`GenericWorkload`](/docs/reference/command-line-tools-reference/feature-gates/#GenericWorkload)
  feature gate (which now integrates Gang scheduling and Workload-aware preemption) is Beta and disabled by default on the `kube-apiserver`, `kube-controller-manager` and `kube-scheduler`.
  Ensure your manifests are updated to use the `scheduling.k8s.io/v1beta1`
  {{< glossary_tooltip text="API group" term_id="api-group" >}}.

**Beta features:**
* **DRA ResourceClaim support for workloads:** The
  [`DRAWorkloadResourceClaims`](/docs/reference/command-line-tools-reference/feature-gates/#DRAWorkloadResourceClaims)

>   feature gate on the `kube-apiserver`, `kube-controller-manager`, `kube-scheduler` and `kubelet`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Many of the workload-aware scheduling improvements are now available as Beta features in v1.37, while new advanced capabilities are introduced in Alpha. Both Beta and Alpha features here are disabled by default and require manual enablement.

**Beta features:**

* **Workload API, gang scheduling, and preemption:** The
  [`GenericWorkload`](/docs/reference/command-line-tools-reference/feature-gates/#GenericWorkload)
  feature gate (which now integrates gang scheduling and workload-aware preemption) is Beta and disabled by default on the `kube-apiserver`, `kube-controller-manager` and `kube-scheduler`.
  Ensure your manifests are updated to use the `scheduling.k8s.io/v1beta1`
  {{< glossary_tooltip text="API group" term_id="api-group" >}}.
* **DRA ResourceClaim support for workloads:** Enable the
  [`DRAWorkloadResourceClaims`](/docs/reference/command-line-tools-reference/feature-gates/#DRAWorkloadResourceClaims)
  feature gate on the `kube-apiserver`, `kube-controller-manager`, `kube-scheduler` and `kubelet`.
```

Reviewer 5: Actually @tineoc we don't recommend using glossary tooltips within blog articles. That shortcode is for use in documentation.

**Alpha features:**

* **Topology-aware scheduling:** Enable the
  [`TopologyAwareWorkloadScheduling`](/docs/reference/command-line-tools-reference/feature-gates/#TopologyAwareWorkloadScheduling)
  feature gate on the `kube-apiserver` and `kube-scheduler`.

* **CompositePodGroup API:** Enable the
  [`CompositePodGroup`](/docs/reference/command-line-tools-reference/feature-gates/#CompositePodGroup)

>   feature gate on both the `kube-apiserver`, `kube-controller-manager` and `kube-scheduler`, and ensure the `scheduling.k8s.io/v1alpha3` API group is enabled.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* **CompositePodGroup API:** Enable the
  [`CompositePodGroup`](/docs/reference/command-line-tools-reference/feature-gates/#CompositePodGroup)
  feature gate on the `kube-apiserver`, `kube-controller-manager` and `kube-scheduler`, and ensure the `scheduling.k8s.io/v1alpha3` API group is enabled.
```

---
layout: blog
title: "Kubernetes v1.37: Advancing Workload-Aware Scheduling"
draft: true
slug: kubernetes-v1-37-advancing-workload-aware-scheduling
author: >
  Antoni Zawodny (Google),
  Bartosz Rejman (Google),
  Heba Elayoty (Microsoft),
  Jon Huhn (Microsoft),
  Maciej Skoczeń (Google),
  Maciej Wyrzuc (Google),
  Matt Matejczyk (Google)
---

> AI/ML and complex batch workloads continue to push the boundaries of Kubernetes scheduling. Following the foundational workload-centric enhancements introduced in previous releases, Kubernetes v1.37 delivers the next major milestone in the Workload-Aware Scheduling (WAS) journey. In this release, the core Workload and PodGroup APIs—enabling gang scheduling—along with Workload-Aware Preemption (WAP) and Dynamic Resource Allocation (DRA) ResourceClaim support, all graduate to Beta, solidifying their role in the Kubernetes ecosystem.

Reviewer 5: ResourceClaim is already v1. Maybe we wanted to communicate that Workload and PodGroup can work with ResourceClaim, but... they also work with the v1 Pod API, and we don't mention that. I felt that the ResourceClaim mention was misleading as written, so I suggest:

```suggestion
AI/ML and complex batch workloads continue to push the boundaries of Kubernetes scheduling. Following the foundational workload-centric enhancements introduced in previous releases, Kubernetes v1.37 delivers the next major milestone in the _Workload-Aware Scheduling_ (WAS) journey.
In this release the core Workload and PodGroup APIs, that enable gang scheduling, graduate to beta. Alongside those API graduations, [Workload-Aware Preemption](/docs/concepts/scheduling-eviction/workload-aware-preemption/) also graduates to Beta, solidifying these features' role in the Kubernetes ecosystem.
```

However, I don't know how well it matches what you originally wanted to say.

Author: We aren't referring to the ResourceClaim API itself graduating, but rather the DRA Workload ResourceClaims feature ([KEP-5729](https://kep.k8s.io/5729), guarded by the DRAWorkloadResourceClaims feature gate), which allows ResourceClaims to be shared and reserved across whole PodGroups. That capability is graduating to Beta in v1.37.

We can clarify the wording to make this explicit. Would "and shared DRA ResourceClaims for PodGroups" make sense?

Reviewer 5: > We can clarify the wording to make this explicit. Would "and shared DRA ResourceClaims for PodGroups" make sense?

It would.

---

I think it's best I merge this as-is. If you've the capacity and inclination to reword this introduction, you can do that (including the reviews) any time before publication, or even afterwards.

If fhanging the article after publication, we'd normally add a little note at the foot of the article to say we changed it.

> To address the hierarchical scheduling requirements of modern high-performance distributed workloads, v1.37 introduces the new `CompositePodGroup` API. This new core API allows expressing multi-level topology constraints, gang scheduling, and preemption policies for complex, heterogeneous groups of Pods. Crucially, this architectural expansion unlocks native scheduling support for advanced workload structures commonly managed by higher-order APIs like JobSet and LeaderWorkerSet (LWS).

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
To address the hierarchical scheduling requirements of modern high-performance distributed workloads, v1.37 introduces the new [CompositePodGroup](/docs/concepts/workloads/compositepodgroup-api/) API.
This new API allows expressing multi-level topology constraints, gang scheduling, and preemption policies for complex, heterogeneous groups of Pods. Crucially, this architectural expansion unlocks native scheduling support for advanced workload structures commonly managed by higher-order extension APIs such as JobSet and LeaderWorkerSet (LWS).
```
?

It's not part of the core API group. We could call it in-tree, but I wouldn't say that either.

> Alongside these API additions, v1.37 focuses on streamlining adoption by introducing a new set of Controller Integration APIs and the `workloadbuilder` library. These provide standardized building blocks that significantly simplify how out-of-tree controllers can integrate with WAS capabilities. Utilizing these new tools, the native Job controller integration has been upgraded to fully consume the expanded WAS APIs—enabling advanced scheduling policies, flexible disruption modes, and topology-aware scheduling for standard batch workloads.

Reviewer 5: (nit; can fix after a merge)
```suggestion
Alongside these API additions, v1.37 focuses on streamlining adoption by introducing a new set of _controller integration APIs_ and the `workloadbuilder` Go library. These provide standardized building blocks that significantly simplify how out-of-tree controllers can integrate with WAS capabilities.
Utilizing these new tools, the native Job controller integration has been upgraded to fully consume the expanded WAS APIs—enabling advanced scheduling policies, flexible disruption modes, and topology-aware scheduling for standard batch workloads.
```

> ## Gang Scheduling and Workload/PodGroup APIs

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
## Gang scheduling and Workload / PodGroup APIs
```

Kubernetes v1.37 delivers a major milestone: Workload/PodGroup APIs and Gang Scheduling
are officially graduating to Beta. This graduation signals that native, "all-or-nothing"

> scheduling for workloads is solidifying for wider adoption.

Reviewer 5: (nit; can fix after a merge)
```suggestion
Kubernetes v1.37 delivers a major milestone: [Workload](/docs/concepts/workloads/workload-api/) / [PodGroup](/docs/concepts/workloads/podgroup-api/) APIs and _gang scheduling_
are officially graduating to Beta. This graduation signals that native, "all-or-nothing"
scheduling for workloads is solidifying for wider adoption.
```

General Availability (GA). For early adopters who have been testing these features,
take note of the alpha versioning transition: v1alpha2 has been entirely replaced by v1alpha3.
This transition introduces breaking changes designed to clean up the API structure around `disruptionMode`.

### Native PodGroup queueing

A significant under-the-hood improvement in v1.37 makes the PodGroup a first-class citizen in the scheduling queue.
Previously, even if belonging to a PodGroup, all member Pods were queued individually. Now, only the top-level PodGroup
object is queued. This ensures all Pods share the same queueing behavior and lays the groundwork
for more advanced PodGroup queueing strategies in the future.

### Dynamic elasticity with minCount mutability

In earlier iterations, the `minCount` field, which dictates the minimum number of Pods required
to successfully schedule a PodGroup, was strictly immutable. In v1.37, `minCount` is now mutable.
This API change unlocks flexibility for elastic workloads. Controllers can now dynamically
adjust the minimum required size of a gang on the fly, allowing workloads to gracefully degrade
or expand without interrupting already-scheduled Pods.

> ## Workload-Aware Preemption

Reviewer 5: (nit; can fix after a merge)
```suggestion
## Workload-aware preemption
```

In Kubernetes v1.37 the separate
`WorkloadAwarePreemption` [feature gate](/docs/reference/command-line-tools-reference/feature-gates/)

> for Workload-aware preemption was merged into the `GenericWorkload` feature gate,

Reviewer 5: (nit; can fix after a merge)
```suggestion
for _workload-aware preemption_ was merged into the `GenericWorkload` feature gate,
```
(also OK with no italics)

differences between the v1.36 and v1.37 releases:

### Performance and optimality

To check whether a preemptor can fit in the cluster thanks to preemption, the scheduler
simulates the removal of all potential victims and re-runs the scheduling algorithm. After
that it tries to reprieve as many victims as possible. In the v1.36 release, the scheduling
algorithm was run for each victim reprieval, verifying whether with the victim reprieved, the algorithm
can still find a valid placement for the preemptor. In v1.37, the scheduling algorithm is run only once
and the preemptor Pods are assumed based on its output. Later, the reprieval checks
whether a victim can still run in its place with the preemptor assumed.

### PodGroup as a victim

One of the limitations of v1.36 was the fact that the default preemption for single Pods
was not aware of PodGroups and was not respecting their `disruptionMode` fields, allowing
for disruption of single Pods even when the PodGroup had `disruptionMode: {all: {}}` set.
Kubernetes v1.37 removes this limitation; the default preemption now respects the PodGroup
`disruptionMode` field.

> ### Rename of the disruptionMode fields

Reviewer 5: (nit; can fix after a merge)
```suggestion
### Rename of the `disruptionMode` fields
```

During the promotion of the API to Beta, the `disruptionMode` field was changed to decouple
its naming from the PodGroup object, allowing consistent naming across PodGroups and CompositePodGroups.
The modes changed as follows: `PodGroup` became `all`, and `Pod` became `single`.

> ### Support for preemptionPolicy

Reviewer 5: (nit; can fix after a merge)
```suggestion
### Support for `preemptionPolicy`
```

### Defining a workload hierarchy

To express multi-level scheduling requirements, you define a hierarchy of templates in a Workload object. Controllers then create the corresponding CompositePodGroup and PodGroup objects from that hierarchy.

To support this, the Workload API is extended with the `spec.compositePodGroupTemplates` field. Each CompositePodGroupTemplate defines a template for a parent CompositePodGroup and directly nests the templates (`podGroupTemplates` and/or `compositePodGroupTemplates`) from which its child groups derive.

Below is a sample Workload object that defines a two-level template hierarchy:

```yaml
apiVersion: scheduling.k8s.io/v1beta1
kind: Workload
metadata:

>   name: example-workload

Reviewer 5: (nit; can fix after a merge)
```suggestion
  name: example-workload
  annotations:
    kubernetes.io/description: "Example Workload with two levels of Pod grouping"
```
(or similar)

I recommend setting the `kubernetes.io/description` annotation on most example manifests. Maybe mention that the driver Pod(s) do need to schedule alongside the workers; the workers gang as a 4 (or more?) Pod batch, whereas for the driver Pods all that's needed is for one of them to schedule somewhere.

Author: Done.

spec:
  compositePodGroupTemplates:
    - name: workload-root
      schedulingPolicy:
        gang:
          minGroupCount: 2
      podGroupTemplates:
        - name: workers
          schedulingPolicy:
            gang:
              minCount: 4
        - name: driver
          schedulingPolicy:
            gang:
              minCount: 1
```

After creating `example-workload`, a controller can stamp out the corresponding runtime group objects from these templates:

1. A root CompositePodGroup that references the `workload-root` template in `example-workload` and carries its group-level scheduling policy (gang scheduling with `minGroupCount: 2`):

    ```yaml
    apiVersion: scheduling.k8s.io/v1alpha3
    kind: CompositePodGroup
    metadata:

>       name: example-root-group

Reviewer 5: I recommend setting the `kubernetes.io/description` annotation on most example manifests.

Author: Done.

    spec:
      workloadRef:
        workloadName: example-workload
        templateName: workload-root
      schedulingPolicy:
        gang:
          minGroupCount: 2
    ```

2. Two child PodGroup objects (`example-workload-workers` and `example-workload-driver`) that reference their respective leaf templates in `example-workload` and link to the root group via `parentCompositePodGroupName`:

    ```yaml
    apiVersion: scheduling.k8s.io/v1beta1
    kind: PodGroup
    metadata:

>       name: example-workload-workers

Reviewer 5: (nit; can fix after a merge)
I recommend setting the `kubernetes.io/description` annotation on most example manifests.

Author: Done.

    spec:
      parentCompositePodGroupName: example-root-group
      workloadRef:
        workloadName: example-workload
        templateName: workers
      schedulingPolicy:
        gang:
          minCount: 4
    ---
    apiVersion: scheduling.k8s.io/v1beta1
    kind: PodGroup
    metadata:

>       name: example-workload-driver

Reviewer 5: (nit; can fix after a merge)
I recommend setting the `kubernetes.io/description` annotation on most example manifests.

Author: Done.

* **`all`**: Enforces "all-or-nothing" disruption semantics across the entire CompositePodGroup hierarchy. If any Pod within the descendant subtree must be preempted, the scheduler evicts all Pods across the entire hierarchy together.

## Topology-aware scheduling

In Kubernetes v1.37, topology-aware scheduling expands to support complex, multi-level workload hierarchies and delivers performance improvements for existing single-level deployments.

### Multi-level topology-aware scheduling

In Kubernetes v1.36, we introduced foundational topology-aware scheduling, allowing you to define co-location constraints directly on a PodGroup. While effective for single-level groupings, complex distributed workloads—such as large-scale AI/ML training, JobSet deployments, or disaggregated inference via LeaderWorkerSet (LWS)—often require co-location across multiple levels of cluster infrastructure simultaneously.

For example, an entire workload may need to run within a single availability zone, while different parts of that workload (such as specific worker groups or driver processes) require strict co-location within specific server racks.

> In Kubernetes v1.37, alongside the new CompositePodGroup API (`scheduling.k8s.io/v1alpha3`), topology-aware scheduling expands to support **multi-level topology-aware scheduling**. You can now express complex co-location requirements by specifying topology constraints at different levels of a group hierarchy.

Reviewer 5: (nit; can fix after a merge)
```suggestion
In Kubernetes v1.37, alongside the new CompositePodGroup API (`scheduling.k8s.io/v1alpha3`), topology-aware scheduling expands to support *multi-level topology-aware scheduling*. You can now express complex co-location requirements by specifying topology constraints at different levels of a group hierarchy.
```

### Top-down topology constraint resolution

During hierarchical scheduling, the `kube-scheduler` resolves multi-level topology constraints in a **top-down** manner. Specifically, topology domains that are considered during the scheduling of a child group are confined within a topology domain that corresponds to the placement assumed by the parent group.

### Configuration and runtime execution

Using the updated Workload API (`scheduling.k8s.io/v1beta1`), you can configure multi-level topology constraints directly within `compositePodGroupTemplates`. In the example below, the parent template constrains the overall workload to a single availability zone (`topology.kubernetes.io/zone`), while child templates for `workers` and `driver` constrain their respective Pods to server racks (`topology.example.com/rack`) within that selected zone:

```yaml
apiVersion: scheduling.k8s.io/v1beta1
kind: Workload
metadata:
  name: multi-level-tas-workload

>   namespace: job-ns

Reviewer 5: (nit; can fix after a merge)
I recommend setting the `kubernetes.io/description` annotation on most example manifests.

Author: Done.

spec:
  compositePodGroupTemplates:
  - name: root
    schedulingPolicy:
      gang:
        minGroupCount: 2
    schedulingConstraints:
      topology:
      - key: topology.kubernetes.io/zone
    podGroupTemplates:
    - name: workers
      schedulingPolicy:
        gang:
          minCount: 8
      schedulingConstraints:
        topology:
        - key: topology.example.com/rack
    - name: driver
      schedulingPolicy:
        gang:
          minCount: 1
      schedulingConstraints:
        topology:
        - key: topology.example.com/rack
```

When a controller creates an instance of this workload at runtime, it spawns the corresponding runtime objects from these templates:

1. The root CompositePodGroup referencing the `root` template, carrying the availability zone topology constraint and the hierarchical gang scheduling policy.
2. The two child PodGroup objects (`tas-workload-workers` and `tas-workload-driver`), each referencing the root CompositePodGroup as their parent group via the `parentCompositePodGroupName` spec field:

```yaml
apiVersion: scheduling.k8s.io/v1alpha3
kind: CompositePodGroup
metadata:
  name: tas-workload-root

>   namespace: job-ns

Reviewer 5: (nit; can fix after a merge)
I recommend setting the `kubernetes.io/description` annotation on most example manifests.

Reviewer 5: Alternatively, write a multi-line comment before the `tas-workload-root` CompositePodGroup.

Author: Done.

spec:
  workloadRef:
    workloadName: multi-level-tas-workload
    templateName: root
  schedulingPolicy:
    gang:
      minGroupCount: 2
  schedulingConstraints:
    topology:
    - key: topology.kubernetes.io/zone
---
apiVersion: scheduling.k8s.io/v1beta1
kind: PodGroup
metadata:
  name: tas-workload-workers

>   namespace: job-ns

Reviewer 5: (nit; can fix after a merge)
I recommend setting the `kubernetes.io/description` annotation on most example manifests.

Author: Done.

spec:
  parentCompositePodGroupName: tas-workload-root
  workloadRef:
    workloadName: multi-level-tas-workload
    templateName: workers
  schedulingPolicy:
    gang:
      minCount: 8
  schedulingConstraints:
    topology:
    - key: topology.example.com/rack
---
apiVersion: scheduling.k8s.io/v1beta1
kind: PodGroup
metadata:
  name: tas-workload-driver

>   namespace: job-ns

Reviewer 5: (nit; can fix after a merge)
I recommend setting the `kubernetes.io/description` annotation on most example manifests.

Author: Done.

Validation is deny-by-default: a controller declares the policies and disruption modes it actually supports through `AllowedPolicies` and `AllowedDisruptionModes`, and anything outside those lists is rejected. Building blocks added in future releases therefore stay unavailable until a controller explicitly opts into them.

For hierarchical workloads where a parent controller owns the Workload and delegates group creation to its children, `NewBuilderFromExistingWorkload` lets a child materialize only its own PodGroup from the parent's Workload.

Neither the building blocks nor the library have a feature gate of their own; they become user-visible through whichever controller adopts them. The native Job controller is the first to do so, and we detail it in the next section.

## Integration with the Job controller

> Building upon the new Controller Integration APIs, the Job API now features an explicit `.spec.scheduling` field, so you declare how a Job should be scheduled instead of relying on the Job controller to infer it from the Job's shape. This expands support well beyond static, indexed, and fully-parallel Jobs.

Reviewer 5: (nit; can fix after a merge)
```suggestion
Building upon the new _controller integration_ APIs, the Job API now features an explicit `.spec.scheduling` field, so you can declare how a Job should be scheduled instead of relying on the Job controller to infer it from the Job's shape. This expands support well beyond static, indexed, and fully-parallel Jobs.
```

Author: Done.

Reviewer 5: Doesn't look changed to me (but the feedback was only a nit).

`.spec.scheduling` is composed of the building blocks described above:

* `schedulingPolicy` — `basic` for standard Pod-by-Pod scheduling, or `gang` for all-or-nothing scheduling.
* `schedulingConstraints` — the topology domain the Job's Pods must be co-located within.
* `disruptionMode` — whether the Job's Pods can be preempted individually (`single`) or only as a whole (`all`).
* `resourceClaims` — the ResourceClaims shared by all of the Job's Pods.

For example:

```yaml
apiVersion: batch/v1
kind: Job
metadata:

>   name: distributed-training-job

Reviewer 5: (nit; can fix after a merge)
I recommend setting the `kubernetes.io/description` annotation on most example manifests.

Author: Done.

spec:
  parallelism: 8
  completions: 8
  scheduling:
    schedulingPolicy:

>       gang: {}                # minCount omitted -> defaults to parallelism (8)

Reviewer 5: (nit; can fix after a merge)
```suggestion
      gang: {}                # minCount omitted → defaults to parallelism (8)
```

    schedulingConstraints:
      topology:
      - key: topology.kubernetes.io/zone
    disruptionMode:
      all: {}
  template:
    spec:
      containers:
      ...
```

Omitting `.spec.scheduling`, or omitting `schedulingPolicy` within it, selects the `basic` policy, which behaves exactly like standard Job scheduling today.

For every Job it manages, the controller compiles this configuration into a Workload and a PodGroup
owned by the Job, and sets `.spec.schedulingGroup.podGroupName` on each Pod it creates so the scheduler
treats them as one group. Once created, `.spec.scheduling` is immutable, with one exception:
`schedulingPolicy.gang.minCount` can be updated, which lets you resize a running gang.

## DRA ResourceClaim support for workloads

As the core WAS APIs mature, so do their integrations with {{< glossary_tooltip text="Dynamic Resource Allocation" term_id="dra" >}}
(DRA). Kubernetes v1.36 introduced the [`DRAWorkloadResourceClaims`](/docs/reference/command-line-tools-reference/feature-gates/#DRAWorkloadResourceClaims)
feature, allowing {{< glossary_tooltip text="ResourceClaims" term_id="resourceclaim" >}}

> to be replicated and reserved for entire PodGroups and shared by all their

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
As the core WAS APIs mature, so do their integrations with [Dynamic Resource Allocation](/docs/concepts/resource-management/dynamic-resource-allocation/)
(DRA). Kubernetes v1.36 introduced the [`DRAWorkloadResourceClaims`](/docs/reference/command-line-tools-reference/feature-gates/#DRAWorkloadResourceClaims)
feature gate. The associated feature allows [ResourceClaims](/docs/concepts/resource-management/dynamic-resource-allocation/dra-api/#resourceclaims-templates)
to be replicated and reserved for entire PodGroups and shared by all their
```

member Pods:

```yaml
apiVersion: scheduling.k8s.io/v1beta1
kind: PodGroup
metadata:
  name: training-job-workers-pg
spec:
  ...
  resourceClaims:
    - name: pg-claim
      resourceClaimTemplateName: my-claim-template
---
apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
  name: topology-aware-workers-pg-pod
spec:
  ...
  schedulingGroup:
    podGroupName: training-job-workers-pg
  resourceClaims:
    - name: pg-claim
      resourceClaimTemplateName: my-claim-template
```

> In Kubernetes v1.37, the `DRAWorkloadResourceClaims` feature graduated to Beta.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
In Kubernetes v1.37, the `DRAWorkloadResourceClaims` feature gate graduated to Beta.

```

Or if we do want to describe the feature, use English words, eg:
```diff
-In Kubernetes v1.37, the `DRAWorkloadResourceClaims` feature graduated to Beta.
+In Kubernetes v1.37, _DRA ResourceClaim support for workloads_ graduated to Beta.
```

While the API and core functionality of the feature remain unchanged, one change
eliminates some potentially surprising behavior when disabling the feature.
Previously when one of a Pod's `spec.resourceClaims` referenced a
ResourceClaimTemplate and matched one of its PodGroup's `spec.resourceClaims`

> and the feature was _disabled_, a ResourceClaim was created for the Pod instead

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
and the `DRAWorkloadResourceClaims` feature gate was **disabled**, a ResourceClaim was created for the Pod instead
```
?

of the PodGroup. In that scenario in v1.37, no ResourceClaim is created at all.
This change prevents Kubernetes from creating a flood of ResourceClaims from a
ResourceClaimTemplate and potentially exhausting DRA resources when a
claim intended to be shared by a whole PodGroup is replicated for each and every
Pod in the group.

For more information, see the [feature documentation](/docs/concepts/resource-management/dynamic-resource-allocation/dra-api#workload-resource-claims).

## What's next?

> The Workload-Aware Scheduling Working Group (WG-WAS) is currently finalizing plans for the Kubernetes v1.38 release cycle. While the roadmap is still taking shape (stay tuned!), the following key initiatives are already planned:

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
The [Workload-Aware Scheduling Working Group](https://www.kubernetes.dev/community/community-groups/wg/workload-aware-scheduling/) (WG WAS) is currently finalizing its plans for the Kubernetes v1.38 release cycle. While the roadmap is still taking shape (stay tuned!), the following key initiatives are already planned:
```

* **Graduation of Workload and PodGroup APIs to GA:** Solidifying the core foundation of workload-aware scheduling as a stable Kubernetes API.
* **Graduation of Topology-Aware Scheduling (TAS) and CompositePodGroup (CPG) to Beta:** Bringing these advanced placement and hierarchical scheduling features to Beta stability.

> * **Graduation of Controller Integration Building Blocks to Beta:** Further refining the integration APIs to ensure a robust developer experience.

Reviewer 5: (nit; can fix after a merge)
```suggestion
* **Graduation of controller integration building blocks to Beta:** Further refining the integration APIs to ensure a robust developer experience.
```

  feature gate on the `kube-apiserver` and `kube-scheduler`.

* **CompositePodGroup API:** Enable the
  [`CompositePodGroup`](/docs/reference/command-line-tools-reference/feature-gates/#CompositePodGroup)
  feature gate on the `kube-apiserver`, `kube-controller-manager` and `kube-scheduler`, and ensure the `scheduling.k8s.io/v1alpha3` API version is enabled.
  Note that enabling `CompositePodGroup` on the `kube-controller-manager` also requires the [`TopologyAwareWorkloadScheduling`](/docs/reference/command-line-tools-reference/feature-gates/#TopologyAwareWorkloadScheduling) feature gate to be enabled.
* **Workload API integration with the Job controller:** Enable the
  [`WorkloadWithJob`](/docs/reference/command-line-tools-reference/feature-gates/#WorkloadWithJob)
  feature gate on the `kube-apiserver` and `kube-controller-manager`.
* **PodGroup `preemptionPolicy`:** Enable the
  [`PodGroupPreemptionPolicy`](/docs/reference/command-line-tools-reference/feature-gates/#PodGroupPreemptionPolicy)
  feature gate on the `kube-apiserver` and `kube-scheduler`.

> **Controller Integration APIs:**

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
**Controller integration APIs:**
```

We encourage you to try out workload-aware scheduling in your test clusters
and share your experiences to help shape the future of Kubernetes scheduling.
You can send your feedback by:

* Reaching out via [Slack (#wg-workload-aware-scheduling)](https://kubernetes.slack.com/archives/C0AHLJ0EAEL).
* Joining the [WG Workload-Aware Scheduling](https://www.kubernetes.dev/community/community-groups/wg/workload-aware-scheduling/) or [SIG Scheduling](https://www.kubernetes.dev/community/community-groups/sigs/scheduling/#meetings) meetings.
* Filing a new [issue](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues) in the Kubernetes repository.

## Learn more

To dive deeper into the architecture and design of these features, read the KEPs:

* [KEP-4671: Gang Scheduling Support in Kubernetes](https://kep.k8s.io/4671)
* [KEP-5710: Workload-aware preemption](https://kep.k8s.io/5710)
* [KEP-5732: Topology-aware workload scheduling](https://kep.k8s.io/5732)
* [KEP-6012: CompositePodGroup API](https://kep.k8s.io/6012)
* [KEP-6089: WAS: Controller Integration APIs](https://kep.k8s.io/6089)
* [KEP-5547: WAS: Integrate Workload APIs with Job controller](https://kep.k8s.io/5547)

> * [KEP-5729: DRA: ResourceClaim Support for Workloads](https://kep.k8s.io/5729)

Reviewer 5: (nit; can fix after a merge)

These links are better for a blog article:
```suggestion
* [KEP-4671: Gang Scheduling Support in Kubernetes](https://www.kubernetes.dev/resources/keps/4671/)
* [KEP-5710: Workload-aware preemption](https://www.kubernetes.dev/resources/keps/5710/)
* [KEP-5732: Topology-aware workload scheduling](https://www.kubernetes.dev/resources/keps/5732/)
* [KEP-6012: CompositePodGroup API](https://www.kubernetes.dev/resources/keps/6012/)
* [KEP-6089: WAS: Controller Integration APIs](https://www.kubernetes.dev/resources/keps/6089/)
* [KEP-5547: WAS: Integrate Workload APIs with Job controller](https://www.kubernetes.dev/resources/keps/5547/)
* [KEP-5729: DRA: ResourceClaim Support for Workloads](https://www.kubernetes.dev/resources/keps/5729/)
```
